[MUSIC PLAYING, WITH NON ENGLISH
CHANTING]
>> So through the eyes love
attains the heart for the eyes
are the scouts of the heart.
And the eyes go reconnoitering
for what would please the heart
to possess.
And when they are in full
accord and firm, all three
in one resolve, at that
time perfect love is
born from what the eyes have
made welcome to the heart.
For as all true loves know,
love is perfect kindness
which is born there is no doubt
from the heart and the eyes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> If there were a giant map of
the world's great mythologies,
you could throw a dart and
anywhere it lands you find
a love story, tales woven to
express the heart's deepest
desire.
For example, the
ancient Babylonian myth
of Pyramus and Thisbe,
two young lovers
doomed by a chance
mistake and bad timing,
or Echo and Narcissus,
a trail of seductions
that ends with a dagger
through a broken heart--
just too many.
So take your pick, there
are multitudes of choices.
The study of the
mythology of love
was a favorite of
Joseph Campbell.
One of his best and
most famous essays
celebrates this
universal mystery.
Ask him where he
would like to start,
as I did during
our conversations
on the power of myth a
quarter of a century ago,
and he invariably answered,
in the Middle Ages.
He relished in stories
of love and courtship
for the noble and gentle
hearts that managed somehow
to transcend raw lust.
Because those stories
helped to create
a distinctive Western
consciousness,
in time they would encourage
personal challenges
to the dogma of
church and state.
So love, in other
words, as Joe said,
could lead to revolution,
even against God.
Our first conversations
took place
at George Lucas's Skywalker
Ranch in California.
Like a weaver of
fine cloth, Campbell
spun the tales and
legends of love
to a marvelous tapestry
of the human psyche.
Let's talk about love.
>> Let's talk about love, fine.
>> But it's such a vast subject
that in mythology that if I had
come to you and said, let's talk
about love but where should we
begin, what would
your answer have been?
>> I think my answer would
have been the troubadours
in the 12th century.
Let's begin there.
>> Why the troubadours?
>> Well, because they're the
first ones in the West that
really considered love in the
sense that we think of it now,
as a person-to-person
relationship.
>> You're talking
about romantic love?
>> Yes.
It is the seizure that
comes in recognizing
as where your soul's
counterpart in the other person,
and that's what the
troubadours stood for,
and that has become the
ideal in our lives today.
>> What had it been before that?
>> Well, the idea
of love as Eros,
the god who excites
you to sexual desire,
this is not the
person-to-person thing,
the falling in love in the way
the troubadours understood it.
I have a definition for Eros,
the erotic biological urge
as the zeal of the
organs for each other.
And the personal
factor doesn't matter.
>> Where did Eros come from?
>> Well, Eros is Cupid.
And in India, the God of love
is Kama, and he's no Cupid.
He's a big, vigourous youth
with a bow and quiver of arrows.
And the names of the arrows
are such things as death
bringing, agony, and
open up, and really
he just drives
this thing into you
so that it's a total
physiological psychological
explosion that takes place.
Then the other love,
the Christian love
of agape, spiritual love, love
thy neighbor as thyself, again,
it doesn't matter
who the person is.
It's your neighbor.
You must have that kind of love.
But the kind of
seizure that comes
from the meeting of the eyes
as they say in the Troubadour
tradition, and the purely
personal person to person thing
as far as I know, it
originates as an ideal
to be lived for with
the Troubadours.
>> You've said that what
happened in the 12th and 13th
centuries was one of the most
important mutations of human
feeling and spiritual
consciousness that a new way
of experiencing love
came to expression.
>> Yes.
>> And it was in opposition to
that ecclesiastical despotism
of the heart--
>> Yes.
>> Which required people,
particularly young girls barely
out of adolescence to
marry whomever the church
or their parents
wanted them to marry.
>> That's right.
>> And what had this done
to the passion of the heart.
>> Well, the-- to say a word
for the other before I do this,
the usual marriage in
traditional cultures is
arranged for by the families.
It's not a person to
person decision at all.
And this is true to this day
in many parts of the world.
This is not to say that
in arranged marriages
of this kind, there is no love.
There is a lot of love.
There's family love and a
rich love life on that level.
So in the Middle
Ages, of course,
that was the kind
of marriage that
was sanctified by the church.
And so the idea of real
person to person marriage
was very dangerous.
>> Dangerous because
it was heresy.
>> It was not only heresy.
It was adultery.
And that was
punishable by death.
For instance, in
the Tristan romance,
that's the crucial romance--
>> Tristan and Isolde?
>> Yes.
Isolde was engaged
to marry King Mark.
They had never seen each other.
And Tristan is sent over
to fetch Isolde to Mark,
and Isolde's mother
prepares a love potion
so that the two who
are to be married
will have real love
for each other.
And these two youngsters, they
think the love potion is wine,
and they drink it and then
are overtaken with this love.
But Brangaine, the
nurse of Isolde,
realized what had happened.
She went to Tristan and said
you have drunk your death.
And Tristan said
if by my death you
mean this agony of love that
is my life, if by my death
you mean the punishment that
we are to suffer if discovered,
which is namely
execution, I accept that.
But if by my death you
mean eternal punishment
in the fires of hell in
which these people believed,
I accept that, too.
>> That was quite--
>> That's big stuff.
>> For medieval Catholic because
they believed in a literal
hell.
>> Well, these people did.
>> Yes.
So what's the significance
of what he was saying?
>> What he was saying is that
this love is bigger even than
death, than pain, than anything.
This is the affirmation of
the pain of life in a big way.
>> And I would choose this pain
for love now even though it
might mean everlasting
pain and damnation in hell.
>> That's right.
>> And that was a marked
change in how people--
>> Well, that is--
any life career that you
choose in following your bliss
should be chosen
with that sense.
Nobody can frighten me
off from this thing.
>> This is the beginning of the
Romantic idea of the Western
individual taking matters
into his or her own hand.
>> Well, absolutely.
You can see there are
examples in oriental stories
of this kind of thing, but it
did not become a social system.
It has now become the
ideal at any rate of love
in the Western world.
>> Love from one's
own experience?
>> Right.
It's a very mysterious
thing, that electric thing
that happens.
And then the agony
that can follow,
which is that which the
Troubadours celebrate,
the agony of the love, the
sickness the doctors cannot
cure, the wounds that can be
healed only by the weapon that
delivered the wound.
>> Meaning?
>> Well, the wound is the wound
of my passion and agony of love
for this creature, and the only
one who can heal me is the one
who delivered the blow.
>> So we often hurt most
the person we love and heal
the hurt by the love that hurt?
>> That's-- something like that.
That's the paradox of the job.
>> What did you mean, Joe,
when you said that the triumph
of Tristan's view of
love and vision of love,
this beginning of romantic love
in the West was libido over
credo?
>> Well, the credo I believe--
and I believe not
only in the laws
but I believe that these
laws were instituted by God
and there's no arguing with God.
These laws are just heavy weight
on me, and disobeying those
is sin.
And it has to do with
my eternal character.
>> And libido?
>> Libido is the
impulse to life.
>> Comes from where?
>> Comes from the heart.
>> And the heart is what?
>> The heart is the organ of
opening up to somebody else.
That's the human quality
as opposed to the animal
qualities, which
have to do with--
primarily with self-interest.
Opening up to that
which is other
is the opening of the
heart, and that's just
the Troubadour's sort.
It is the opening of the heart.
>> I can certainly
understand, though,
why the church was threatened
by this because how can you have
a church if everyone's
libido is her own God?
>> Why not?
Why can't the
church handle that?
If you can sanctify a marriage
that has been arranged,
why can't you
sanctify a marriage
where two people have
joined each other?
>> So the courage to love became
the courage to affirm against
tradition, whatever knowledge
stands confirmed in one's own
experience.
>> Yeah.
>> Why was that important in
the evolution of the West?
>> Well, it was important in
that it gives the West this
accent as I've been
saying on the individual,
that he should have faith and
his experience and not simply
mouth terms that have come
to him from other mouths.
I think that's the great thing
in the West, the validity
of the individual's
experience of what humanity
is, what life is,
what values are
against the monolithic system.
>> Was there some of this in
the legend of the Holy Grail?
>> Yes.
Wolfram has a very
interesting statement
about the origin of the Grail.
He says the Grail was
brought from heaven
by the neutral angels.
There was the war in heaven
between God and Lucifer
and the angelic hosts that
sided one group with Lucifer
and the other with
God, pair of opposites,
good and evil, God and Satan.
The grail was brought
down through the middle,
the way of the middle,
by the neutral angels.
>> What is the Grail
representing then?
>> Well, the grail becomes the--
what we call it--
that which is
attained and realized
by people who have
lived their own lives.
So the story very
briefly is of this--
I'm giving it now
as Wolfram gives,
but this is just one version.
The Grail king was
a lovely young man,
but he had not
earned that position.
And the Grail represents
the fulfillment
of the highest
spiritual potentialities
of the human consciousness.
And he was a lovely
young man, and he
rode forth from his castle
with the war cry amour.
And as he's riding
forth, a Muslim,
a pagan warrior, the
Mohammedan warrior,
comes out of the
woods, a knight.
And they both level their
lances at each other.
They drive at each other and
the lance of the Grail king
kills the Mohammedan but
the Mohammedan's lance
castrates the Grail king.
What that means is that the
Christian separation of matter
and spirit, of the
dynamism of life
and the spiritual, natural
grace and supernatural grace
has really castrated nature.
And the European mind,
the European life,
has been as it were emasculated
by this true spirituality,
which would have come
from this has been killed.
And then what did
the pagan represent?
He was a person from
the suburbs of Eden.
He was regarded as a nature man.
And on the head of his lance
was written the word grail.
That is to say nature
intends the grail.
Spiritual life is the
bouquet of natural life,
not a supernatural
thing imposed upon it.
And so the impulses of nature
are what give authenticity
to life, not obeying rules come
from a supernatural authority.
That's the sense of the Grail.
>> And the Grail that these
romantic legends were searching
for is the union, once again,
of what had been divided,
the peace that
comes from joining?
>> The Grail becomes symbolic
of an authentic life that has
lived in terms of
its own volition,
in terms of its
own impulse system,
which carries it between the
pairs of opposites of good
and evil, light and dark.
Wolfram starts his
epic with a short poem
saying every act has both
good and evil results.
Every act in life yields pairs
of opposites in its results.
The best we can do is
lean toward the light
as they intend the light.
And what the light is that of
the harmonious relationships
that come from compassion
with suffering, understanding
of the other person.
This is what the Grail's about.
>> When we say God is love, does
that have anything to do with
romantic love?
Does mythology ever link
romantic love in God?
>> Well, that's what it did do.
Love was a divine
visitation, and that's
why it was superior to marriage.
That was the Troubadour idea.
If God is love, well,
then love is God.
>> There's that wonderful
passage in Corinthians by Paul
where he says love bareth all
things, endureth all things.
>> Well, that's
the same business.
Love knows no pain.
>> And yet one of my favorite
stories of mythology is out
of Persia where there's the
idea that Lucifer was condemned
to hell because he
loved God so much.
>> Yeah, and that's a basic
Muslim idea about Iblis--
that's the Muslim
name for Satan--
being God's greatest lover.
>> Why was Satan
thrown into hell?
Well, the standard story is that
when God created the angels,
he told them to bow
to none but himself.
Then he created man who he
regarded as a higher form
than the angels, and he asked
the angels then to serve man.
And Satan would not bow to man.
Now this is interpreted
in the Christian tradition
as I recall from my
boyhood instruction
as being the egotism of Satan.
He would not bow to man.
But in this view, he
could not bow to man
because of his love for God.
He could bow only to God.
And then God says
get out of my sight.
Now the worst of the
pains of hell in so far
as hell has been
described is the absence
of the beloved, which is God.
So how does Iblis sustain
the situation in hell?
By the memory of the echo
of God's voice when God said
go to hell.
And I think that's a
great sign of love.
Do you see?
Well, it's certainly
true in life
that the greatest
tale one can know
is to be separated
from the one you love.
>> Yeah.
>> That's why I've like the
Persian myth for so long.
Satan is God's lover.
>> Yeah.
And he is separated
from God, and that's
the real pain of Satan.
>> You once took the saying
of Jesus love your enemies
and pray for those who persecute
you so that you may be sons
of your father who's in heaven
before he makes the sun to rise
on the evil and the good
and sins reign on the just
and the unjust, you once
took that to be the highest,
the noblest, the boldest
of the Christian teachings.
Do you still feel that way?
>> Well, I think the main
teaching of Christianity is
love your enemies.
>> Hard to do.
>> No, well, that's it.
When Peter drew his sword and
cut off of the servant's ear
there in the Gethsemane affair.
And Jesus said put
up your sword, Peter,
and put the ear back on.
Peter has been drawing
his sword ever since.
And one can speak about
the Petrine or Christian,
Christianity in that sense, and
I would say the main doctrine
and Christianity is
the doctrine of agape,
of a true love
for he who is here
of-- him who is your enemy.
>> How does one love one's
enemy without condoning what
the enemy does,
accepting his aggression?
>> Well, I'll tell
you how to do that.
Do not pluck the moat
from your enemies' eye
but pluck the beam
from your own.
Do you know?
Now I have a friend whom I met
by chance, a young Buddhist
monk from Tibet.
In 1959, the
communists crashed down
and bombed the palace of the
Dalai Lama, bombarded Lhasa
and people murdered and
all that kind of thing.
And the escape, he escaped at
the time of the Dalai Lama.
And those monasteries,
there were monasteries
with 5,000 monks, 6,000
monks all wiped out,
tortured and everything else.
I haven't heard one word of
incrimination of the Chinese
from that young man.
There is absolutely no
condemnation of the Chinese
here.
And you hear this from
the Dalai Lama himself.
You will not hear a
word of condemnation.
This recognition
of the way of life
through which the
vitality of the Spirit
is moving in its
own way, these men
are sufferers of
terrific violence,
and there's no animosity.
I learned religion from that.
>> Do most of the stories of
mythology from whatever culture
say that suffering is
intrinsically a part of life
and that there's
no way around it?
>> I think I'd be willing
to say that they do.
I can't think of anything
now that says if you're going
to live, you won't suffer.
It'll tell you how to understand
and bear and interpret
suffering.
That it will do.
And when the Buddha says there
is escape from suffering,
the escape from
sorrow is nirvana.
Nirvana is a
psychological position
where you are untouched
by desire and fear.
>> But is that realistic?
Does that happen?
>> Yes, certainly.
>> And your life becomes what?
>> Harmonious, well-centered,
and affirmative of life.
>> Even with suffering?
>> Exactly.
There's a passage in Paul's
epistle to the Philippians,
isn't there?
Be as Christ, for Christ did
not think godhood something
to be hung on to, be
clung to but let go
and came down and took life
in the form of a servant,
a servant even unto death.
I'd say come in and accept
the suffering and affirm it.
>> So you would agree with
Abelard in the 12th century who
said that Jesus's death on the
cross was not as a ransom paid,
as a penalty applied, but it
was an act of at one-ment,
at tonement, at
one with the race.
>> That's the most sophisticated
interpretation of why Christ
had to be crucified.
Abelard's idea was that this--
oh, this is connected with
the Grail king and everything
else--
that the coming and of
Christ to be crucified
and illustrating thus
the suffering of life
removes man's mind
from commitment
to the things of this
world in compassion.
It's in compassion with
Christ that we turn to Christ.
And so the injured one
becomes the Savior.
It is the suffering
that evokes the humanity
of the human heart.
>> So you would agree with
Abelard that mankind yearning
for God and God yearning for
mankind in compassion met
at that cross?
>> Yes.
And by contemplating
the cross, you
are contemplating the
true mystery of life
and that love for this
experience, no matter
how horrific the
experience, the love for it.
>> So there's joy
and pain in love?
>> Yeah, there is.
Love, you might say, is
the turning point of life.
And since all life is
sorrowful, so is love.
And the stronger the love,
the more that pain but love
bears all things.
Love itself is a pain
you might say that is
the pain of being truly alive.
>> Once upon a time so long ago
it no longer matters how long
ago, the feminine figure of
the goddess ruled mythology
as the equal of the male.
The Greeks even gave
her top billing.
From chaos, they
said from nothing
came Mother Earth known
as Gaia and sky, Uranus.
They bedded, and
from their coupling
came six twins
known as the Titans
and three giants
known as Cyclopes,
each with 50 heads and 100 arms.
Uranus was disgusted and forced
him to return to their mother's
womb whereupon an
indignant Gaia set out
to make him pay for the
insult. When Uranus came
to their bedroom for
his usual favors,
she recruited one of their
sons to make a sickle,
and together they
took from Uranus
what he was most
unwilling to give up
and dropped the bloody
thing in the sea.
The lesson was not
lost on the Greeks.
It isn't nice to fool
with Mother Nature.
Joseph Campbell liked that
story and told it to me
when we were talking one day
about how patriarchal authority
finally drove the goddess from
the Pantheon of imagination.
Somehow the old guys
figured that if they wanted
to control the world, they
had to change the metaphors,
and the goddess had to go.
She remained the
symbol of fertility,
crucial to humanity's survival
but no equal except rarely
in the exercise of power.
The repercussions have
played out down the centuries
and are still with us.
We return now to
our conversation.
>> The Lord's Prayer begins
our father which art in heaven.
>> Yeah.
>> Could it have
begun our mother?
>> This is a metaphorical image.
This is a symbolic image.
And to make the point that
it's not your father--
your physical father, we have
our father who art in heaven.
But heaven again is a symbolic
idea where it would heaven be.
It is no place.
All of the references of
religious and mythological
images are to planes
of consciousness
of fields of experience
potential in the human spirit.
And these are to evoke
attitudes and experiences that
are appropriate to a meditation
on the mystery of the source
of your own being I would say.
So there have been
systems of religion
where the mother is the
prime parent, the source,
and she's really a
more immediate parent
than the father because one
is born from the mother,
and then the first
experience of any infant
is the mother so that
the image of woman
is the image of the world.
You might say that
mythology is simply
a translation of the
world into a mother image.
We talk of Mother
Earth and so forth.
>> But what happened
along the way, Joe,
to this reverence that in
primitive societies was
directed toward the goddess
figure, the great goddess,
the Mother Earth?
What happened to that?
>> That comes in primarily with
agriculture in the agricultural
societies.
>> Fertility and all of that?
>> It has to do with Earth.
The human woman does give
birth as the Earth gives birth
to the plants.
She gives nourishment
as the plants do.
So woman magic and Earth
magic are the same.
They are related.
And the personification
then of this energy
which gives birth to
forms and nourishes forms
is properly female.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And so it is in the agricultural
world of ancient Mesopotamia,
the Egyptian Nile, but also
in the earlier planting
culture systems that the
goddess is the mythic form that
is dominant.
>> Because of this obvious
perception of creation issue--
>> That's right.
And when you have a
goddess as the creator,
it's her own very body
that is the universe.
She is identical
with the universe.
And in Egypt, you have
the mother heavens,
Nut-- the goddess Nut, who
represents the whole heavenly
sphere.
>> I was really taken when we
went to Egypt upon first seeing
the figure of Nut in the
ceiling of one of those temples.
>> Yes, I know the temple.
>> It's overwhelming.
>> Yes.
>> There's one scene of
her swallowing the sun.
>> The idea is that she swallows
the sun in the West and gives
birth to the sun in the East,
and it passes through her body
at night.
And so she is the heavens.
>> So it would be natural
for people trying to explain
the wonders of the universe
to look to the female figure
as the explanation for what
they saw in their own lives.
>> Not only that but then when
you move to a philosophical
point of view, the female
represents what in the Kantian
terminology, we call the
forms of sensibility,
the female represents
time and space itself.
She is time and space,
and the mystery beyond her
is beyond pairs of opposites.
So it isn't male,
and it isn't female.
It neither is nor isn't,
but everything is within her
so that the gods
are her children.
Everything you can think
of, everything you can see
is the production
of the goddess.
Oh, there's wonderful story.
The Vedic gods are together,
and they see a strange amorphous
thing down the way
like a smoky fog.
And they say what's that.
They don't know what it is.
And Agni, the god of fire, says
I'll go find out who that is.
So he goes up to this smoky
thing, and he says who are you.
And from the smoky thing,
this voice says who are you.
And he says I'm Agni.
I'm the lord of fire.
I can burn anything.
And out of the fog there
comes a piece of straw.
It falls on the ground.
It says let's see you burn that.
He can't burn it.
He goes back.
He says this is strange.
Well, Vayu, the lord
of wind, says I'll try.
So he goes and the same thing.
I can blow anything around.
Throws it down.
Let's see you blow that.
But he can't.
He goes back.
Then a woman arrives, a
beautiful, mysterious mystic
woman.
And she instructs the gods
and tells them who that is.
That is the ultimate mystery of
being from which you boys have
received your strength, and he
can turn it on or off for you.
And there she comes as the
one who illuminates the gods
themselves concerning
the ultimate ground
of their own being.
>> It's the female wisdom.
>> It's the female as
the giver of forms.
She is the one who
gave the forms,
and she knows where
they came from.
>> I wonder what it would have
meant to us if somewhere along
the way we had begun the
prayer our mother instead
of our father.
What psychological difference
would it have made?
>> Well, it makes a
psychological difference
in the character
of the cultures.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
You have the basic
birth of civilization
in the Near East
with the great river
valleys then as the
main source areas
the Nile, the Tigris Euphrates,
and then over in India
the Indus Valley and
later the Ganges.
This is the world
of the goddess.
All these rivers have
goddess names finally.
Then there come the invasions.
These fighting people
are hurting people.
The Semis are herders
of goats and sheep
and the Indo
Europeans of cattle.
They were formerly the hunters.
They translate a
hunting mythology
into a herding mythology,
but it's animal oriented.
And when you have
hunters, you have killers.
herders, you have
killers because they're
always in movement, nomadic,
coming into conflict
with other people
and they have to conquer
the area they move into.
This comes into the Near East,
and this brings in the warrior
gods like Zeus, like Yahweh.
>> The sword and death
instead of fertility?
>> Right, particularly
the Hebrews.
They really wipe
out the goddess.
The term for the goddess,
the Canaanite goddess
that's used in the Old
Testament is the abomination.
And so many of the
Hebrew kings are
condemned in the Old Testament
for having worship down
the mountaintops.
That's the goddess.
And there was a
very strong accent
against the goddess
in the Hebrew,
which you do not find
in the Indo-European.
There you have Zeus
marrying the goddess,
and then the two play together.
I think it's an extreme case
that we have in the Bible,
and our own Western
subjugation of the female
is really I think a function
of biblical thinking.
>> Because when you substitute
the male for the female,
you get a different psychology,
a different cultural bias.
>> Particularly if you cut the
female out and don't have any--
if the male is on top
like this and the female
is the subordinate
all the way, you
have a totally different
system from that when
the two are facing each other.
>> And it's permissible in your
culture to do what your gods do
so you just--
>> Well, that's exactly it.
So I would see three
situations here,
one the early one
of the Shia goddess
when the male is hardly
a significant divinity--
she is the total thing--
and then this other one of
the Hebrew of the goddess--
the male the total thing-- in
fact, he takes over her role--
and finally then
the classical one
where the two are into action.
>> There are women today who say
that the spirit of the goddess
has been in exile for 5,000
years since the events that
you--
>> Well not that-- you can't put
it that far back, 5,000 years.
She was a very potent
figure in Hellenistic times
in the Mediterranean.
And she came back with the
Virgin in the Roman Catholic
tradition.
You don't have a
tradition with the goddess
celebrated any more
beautifully and
marvelously than in the
12th and 13th century
French cathedrals, every one
of which is called Notre Dame.
>> What about the Virgin birth?
Suddenly the goddess
reappears in the form
of the chaste and pure vessel
chosen for God's action.
>> Well, in the history
of Western religions,
this is an extremely
interesting development.
The Virgin birth comes in by
way of the Greek tradition.
When you read your four
gospels, the only one
with the Virgin birth in it is
the gospel according to Luke.
And Luke was a Greek.
>> And there was in the Greek
tradition images, legends,
myths of Virgin birth?
>> All of them.
The leader and the swan and
Persephone and the serpent
and this one and that one and
the other one, the Virgin birth
is represented throughout.
>> This was not a new idea
then in Bethlehem in--
>> No.
What is the meaning
of the Virgin birth?
In India, there is this
system of the Kundalini
as it's called, the
idea of the centers--
psychological
centers up the spine,
and they represent a
psychological planes of concern
and consciousness and action.
First is that the rectum, and
this is that of alimentation.
The serpent represents
this, a traveling esophagus
going on just eating,
eating, eating, eating.
And all of us, we wouldn't
be here if we weren't eating.
And then the second center is
that the sex organs center,
and that's the urge
to procreation.
The third center's called--
is that the navels, and this
is where you eat
and want to consume.
And it's not the
alimentary eating.
It's the mastering and smashing
and trashing of others you see.
This is the aggressive mood.
Now the first is
an animal instinct.
The second is an
animal instinct.
The third is an animal instinct.
And these three centers are
located in the pelvic basin.
The next one is at the
level of the heart,
and this is the
opening of compassion
and there you move out of
the field of animal action
into a field that is
properly human and spiritual.
Now in each of these centers,
there is a symbolic form.
At the base, the
first one, there
is the form of the
lingham and yoni, the male
and female organs
in conjunction.
At the heart chakra,
there is again
the male and female organs
in conjunction but in gold.
This is the Virgin birth.
It's the birth of spiritual
man out of the animal man.
Do you understand?
>> And it happens?
>> When you are awakened
at the level of the heart
to compassion and suffering
with the other person.
That's the beginning
of humanity.
And the meditations
of religion properly
are on that level,
the heart level.
>> You say it's the beginning of
humanity, but in these stories,
that's the moment
when gods are born.
The Virgin birth, it's a God
who emerges from that chemistry.
>> And you know who that God is?
It's you.
All of the symbols in
mythology refer to you.
You can get stuck out there
and think it's all out there.
And so you're thinking of
Jesus and all the sentiments
about how he suffered and awe.
What that suffering is is what
ought to be going on in you.
Have you been reborn?
Have you died to
your animal nature
and come to life as
a human incarnation?
>> Why is it significant
that this is of a virgin?
>> Well, it is that the
begetter is the spirit.
It is a spiritual birth.
The Virgin conceived of
the word through the ear.
>> The word came like
a shaft of light.
>> Yes.
And now the Buddha was
born from his mother's side
at the level of
the heart chakra.
That's a symbolic birth.
He wasn't born from his mother's
side, but symbolically he was.
>> But the Christ came
the way you and I come.
>> Yes, but of a Virgin.
>> Which is a
power greater than.
>> And then according to
Roman Catholic doctrine,
her virginity was restored.
So nothing happened
physically you might say.
It's not a physical birth.
It's symbolic of a
spiritual transformation.
That's what the
Virgin birth's about.
And so deities are
born that way who
represent beings who act
in terms of compassion
and not in terms of the
lower three centers.
>> If you go back
into antiquity,
do you find images of
the Madonna as the mother
of the Savior child?
>> Well, what you have as the
model for the Madonna actually
is Isis with her child
Horus at her breast.
This was the actual model
for the Madonna symbol.
>> Isis?
Tell me that story.
>> This is a prime myth in
this period of the goddess
as the redeemer, the one who
goes in quest of the lost
spouse or lover, and through
her loyalty and descent
into the realm of
death recovers him.
Isis and her husband
Osiris were twins who
were born of the goddess Nut.
And their younger relatives
were Set and Nephthys, who
are also twins born from Nut.
Set planned to kill
his brother Osiris.
And he took Osiris's
measurements secretly
and had a wonderful
sarcophagus built
that would exactly fit Osiris.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So there was a hilarious
party in progress one
time among the gods, and Set
traps in this sarcophagus.
And he says anyone who
this perfectly fits
can have it as his sarcophagus.
And everybody at
the party tried,
and when Osiris got in, of
course, it perfectly fit.
Just at that time, 72
accomplices come rushing out,
and they clapped the lid on,
strap it together, and throw it
in the Nile.
Now this is the
death of the god.
Whenever you have a death of an
incarnation of god like this,
you're going to
have a resurrection.
You can wait for that.
So he goes floating
down the Nile
and is washed ashore in Syria.
And a beautiful tree
grows up and incorporates
the sarcophagus
in its own trunk.
So this wonderful tree
with glorious aroma
and the local king has
just had a son born to him.
And he's also at the same
time going to build a palace.
The aroma of this
tree is so wonderful,
he cuts it down and brings
it in to be a central pillar
in the main room of the palace.
Poor little Isis, whose husband
has been thrown into the Nile,
starts this wonderful
quest for Osiris.
So she comes to the place
where the palace is and learns
of the wonderful aroma, and
she suspects this is Osiris.
And she gets a job as nurse
to the just born little child.
Well, she lets the child
nurse from her finger.
And she loves the
little child, and she
decides to give it immortality.
So she does this by placing
him in the fireplace,
and the fire to burn away
gradually his mortal body.
But being a goddess, she
could keep that from killing.
Do you understand?
And when that would happen,
she would convert herself
into a swallow and fly
mournfully around the pillar
where her husband is.
Well, one evening the child's
mother came into this room
while the scene was in progress,
saw her child in the fireplace,
let out a scream, and
that broke the spell
and they had to rescue the
child from incineration.
Meanwhile, the
swallow had turned
into this gorgeous nurse,
Isis, and the nurse
gave an explanation
of the situation.
And she said, by the way,
my husband is in that pillar
there, and I'd be
grateful if you could just
let me take it home.
So the king came in,
and he said certainly.
So he removes the
pillar, gives it to Isis,
and is put on a barge.
So on the way back
to the Nile, she
removes the lid, the
cover of the sarcophagus
and lies on top
of her dead spouse
and conceives of
her dead spouse--
this is an image that occurs in
Egyptian on all the time-- out
of death comes life and all
of this kind of business.
And when they land, she
in the papyrus swamp
gives birth to her child
Horus with the dead Osiris
beside her.
This is the motif for
the Madonna actually.
It becomes the Madonna.
In Egyptian symbology,
Isis represents the throne.
The pharaoh sits on
the throne of Isis
as the child sits
on the mother lap.
And when you look in the
Cathedral of Chartres
in the west portal, you
will see the Madonna
as the throne with
the little child Jesus
as the world emperor on her lap.
That is the same image
that's come over.
>> And you say the Christian
fathers took this image?
>> Definitely and
they really say so.
You read the second
letter of Peter,
and he says those
forms which were merely
mythological forms in the past
are now incarnate and actual
in our savior.
They were-- there
was a mythology
of the savior, the dead
and resurrected God,
and it's associated with
the moon, which dies
and is resurrected every month.
And you have the
three nights dark,
and you have Christ
three nights in the tomb
and three days in the tomb
and all this kind of thing.
It's an intentional saying that
which was merely talked about
is now fact.
And no one knows what the
date of Christmas ought to be,
but it's put on the date of
the summer-- of the winter
solstice when the
nights begin to be
shorter and the days
longer, the birth of light.
And so there is a idea
of death to the past
and birth to the future in
our lives and in our thinking
all the time, death
to the animal nature,
birth to the spiritual,
and these symbols
are talking about it
one way or another.
>> So when the--
>> And the goddess is the
one who brings it about.
The second birth is through the
second mother, Notre Dame de
Paris, Notre Dame the
Chartres, our Mother Church.
We are reborn by entering
and leaving a church.
>> And it doesn't
mean physically.
It means--
>> Spiritually.
>> That there's a power
that's unique to the feminine
principle?
>> It can be put that way.
You can-- it's not
necessarily unique to her.
You can have a rebirth
through the male also.
But using this
system of symbols,
the woman becomes
the regenerator.
>> There's that wonderful saying
in the New Testament of Jesus,
in Jesus there is
no male or female.
In the ultimate sense of
things, there is neither.
>> That's-- it would have to be.
If Jesus represents the
source of our being,
we are all as it were
thoughts in the mind of Jesus.
It is the word that has
become flesh in us, too.
>> You and I would possess
characteristics that are both
male and female.
>> Well, actually the body
does, but sometime in the fetal
period, it becomes apparent
that this is going to be male
and this is going to be female.
Meanwhile, it's a
kind of neutral body
with the potentialities
for either inflection.
>> So all through life, we are
honoring or suppressing one
or the other?
>> And in that yin
yang figure from China,
in the dark fish or whatever
you want to call it,
there's a light spot, and in the
light one, there's a dark spot.
That's how they can relate.
You couldn't relate at all
to something that of which
you did not
participate into which
you did not participate at all.
That's why the idea of
God as the absolute other
is a ridiculous idea.
There could be no
relationship to that
which is absolute other.
>> The question arises in
discussing the male/female
principle, the Virgin birth, the
spiritual power that gives us
the second birth, the wise
people of all time have said
that we can live the good life
if we learn in fact to live
spiritually.
But how does one learn
to live spiritually
when one is of the flesh?
Remember Paul said the
desires of the flesh
are against the spirit and
the desires of the spirit
are against the flesh?
How do we learn to
live spiritually?
>> Well, that was the-- in
ancient times and in primitive
times the business
of the teacher.
He was to give you the
clues to a spiritual life.
That was what the
priest was for.
Also that was what
the ritual was for.
A ritual can be defined
as an enactment of a myth.
By participating in
a good sound ritual,
you are actually experiencing
a mythological life.
And it's out of that that one
can learn to live spiritually.
>> These stories of mythology
actually point the way
to the spiritual life.
>> Yes.
You've got to have a clue.
You've got to have a
road map of some kind,
and these are all around us.
They're here.
>> And the road map to which the
goddess stories are pointing is
the map of elevating the
spiritual to an equality with
the physical so that you
live in union with those two?
>> Yes.
There you come to the real
sanctity of the Earth itself
because that is the
body of the goddess.
When Yahweh creates,
he creates of the Earth
and breathes his life into it.
He's not there.
She's there.
Your body is her body.
And there's that
kind of identity.
>> But that's why I'm not
so sure that the future
of the race and the salvation
of the journey is in space.
I think it is well right
here on Earth in the body,
in the womb of all of our being.
>> Well, it certainly is.
When you go out into space, what
you're carrying is your body,
and if that hasn't
been transformed,
space won't
transform it for you.
But thinking about space may
help you to realize something.
>> You've certainly
thought about space.
In this wonderful
passage, you're
describing a page out of
the National Geographic
atlas of the world, but you
read this and something happened
to you.
>> What these pages opened to
me was the vision of a universe
of unimaginable magnitude
and inconceivable violence.
Billions upon billions literally
of roaring thermonuclear
furnaces scattering
from each other,
each thermonuclear furnace being
a star and our sun among them.
Many of them actually
blowing themselves to pieces,
littering the outermost reaches
of space with dust and gas
out of which new stars
with circling planets
are being born right now.
And then for still more remote
distances beyond all these,
there come murmurs,
microwaves which
are echoes of the greatest
cataclysmic explosion of all,
namely, the Big
Bang of creation,
which according
to recent records
must have occurred some
18 billion years ago.
That's where we are,
kiddo, and realize that.
You realize how really
important you are.
One little micro bit in
this great magnitude.
And then out of that
must come the experience
that you and that are
in some sense, one,
and you partake of all of that.
>> And it begins here.
It begins here.
[THEME MUSIC PLAYING]